1 
 
 
 
 
 
Written Submission to the 
Department of Finance with 
respect to the disbursement 
quota for Canadian registered 
charities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 29, 2021 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
2 
 
 
September 29, 2021 
 
 
Dear Department of Finance,  
  
 
 
Blumberg Segal LLP is a law firm based in Toronto that provides legal services to 
Canadian non-profits, registered charities and donors. We have ten lawyers and 5 
consultants/support staff  that focus almost exclusively on non-profit and charity 
compliance issues.  Blumberg Segal LLP (Blumbergs) maintains the websites, 
http://www.CanadianCharityLaw.ca and www.Smartgiving.ca that provide extensive 
information and resources to Canadian charities to encourage them to understand their 
legal obligations and strive for higher ethical standards and to donors to understand how 
to vet charities.  Also, over five years ago, Blumbergs launched a free transparency tool 
for the public at the website www.CharityData.ca with up to seventeen years of 
information on every Canadian registered charity. We encourage donors to be generous 
but careful in the way they practice charity and philanthropy.   Our firm is concerned about 
the well-being of the non-profit and charitable sector and that there is appropriate 
regulation for this very important sector.  
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
We are firmly in favour of an increase in the disbursement quota, ideally to 10%.   We 
also suggest possible changes in our submission to simplify the disbursement quota.   We 
discuss numerous “excuses” provided for the status quo and why they are not convincing, 
as well as suggest many reasons why it would be very positive to increase the 
disbursement quota.  We also respond to specific questions asked by the Department of 
Finance in relation to the disbursement quota.   
 
  
Introduction 
 
In the recent 2021 Federal Budget it was announced that there will be a consultation on 
the disbursement quota (DQ) and this submission is in relation to that consultation.  
 
While we would have preferred that the Department of Finance just increase the DQ, at 
least you are focused on the issue.   For around a decade, our law firm has suggested 
Blumberg Segal LLP – Barristers & Solicitors 

---PAGE BREAK---
3 
 
that the disbursement quota be increased as it was not in line with the significant 
investment returns of foundations and their obligations to society. 
 
Recently in our Submission for the Pre-Budget Consultations for the Canadian Federal 
Budget we wrote : 
 
• 
Recommendation 3: That the Federal government increase the disbursement 
quota payout from the current 3.5% to 10% in line with other groups requesting 
this improvement. 
 
We also noted with respect to the DQ: 
 
3) Private foundations are sitting on approximately $95 billion in assets. Since 2012 
we have suggested an increase in the disbursement quota payout. In the past, we 
had suggested a payout of 5 - 6% but as many years have gone by and many 
foundations have grown considerably, it probably makes more sense to have a 
disbursement quota of 10% per year. This would increase funding to charitable 
organizations by billions of dollars and in light of the devastation caused by COVID-
19 and climate change, it cannot come quick enough. Some foundations have had 
a 10%+ annual return on their investments in the past but have been giving out 
only 3.5% or in some cases far less. The largest private foundation in 2019 (which 
is the last full year available for data) gave out 1%.  
 
The low percentage referred to above may be legal if CRA has approved a reduction in 
the particular foundation’s disbursement quota. In 2019 private foundations according to 
the T3010 data had assets of around $74.5 billion and made gifts to qualified donees of 
$2.45 billion and spent about $832 million on their own charitable activities.  So private 
foundations spent about $3.77 billion on gifts and charitable programs which is about 5% 
of their assets.    
 
Furthermore, with some foundations having received significant returns that are far in 
excess of the 3.5% DQ, and added capital from donors, it raises the question of whether 
there should be more pressure to see greater impact from these foundations.  
 
While we appreciate that some want their foundation to last forever and they see that it is 
more likely that the capital can be maintained if little or no funds are distributed, we need 

---PAGE BREAK---
4 
 
to ask a fundamental question around why we have foundations at all.  Also, we need to 
ask why they are receiving so much tax benefit, and whether it is healthy in a society to 
have such great charitable assets controlled by a very few that is not being actively used 
when there is such great need.     
 
The DQ is a blunt instrument.  It achieves a minimum that only affects registered charities 
who wish to give less than the minimum.   Practically speaking its largest impact is on a 
few large foundations that are spending the minimum or less.   In an ideal world if these 
large foundations were giving out more funds there might not even be a need for it at all. 
We clearly don’t live in that ideal world and this issue of a low DQ has been around for 
over a decade with high investments returns by some foundations and very low payouts.  
 
We recently reviewed the Advisory Committee to the Charitable Sector’s (ACCS) 
submission dealing with the disbursement quota. We believe it is reflective of the views 
of a small number of foundations and some of their professional advisors who are 
opposed to changing the rate of the DQ which would require them to increase 
grantmaking.  .  Some of these foundations advocate for greater tax incentives for 
donations that will predominantly benefit the very wealthy and for de-regulating the charity 
sector so that these foundations can operate with little or no oversight.   We have blogged 
about our concerns with the ACCS report here. Many foundations don’t take such a view 
and are amenable and preparing to adapt to a changed DQ.  
 
There is a good article by Yonis Hassan, a charity leader, entitled “The Advisory 
Committee on the Charitable Sector let down charities and communities by not 
recommending a disbursement quota hike” that focuses on “performative allyship” of 
certain people in dealing with this issue.     
 
Excuses 
In this section we address a  number of excuses given by a few foundations and their 
professional advisors as to why the DQ should not be changed at this juncture.    
 
Complexity  
 
A common excuse is that making achange in the Income Tax Act is extremely 
complicated.   Despite the 2010 changes that simplified the DQ, some people argue that  
changing the 3.5% number in the Income Tax Act is extremely complex.   While the DQ 
may affect different groups in different ways we don’t agree that this is such a complicated 

---PAGE BREAK---
5 
 
question.  In our current society battling COVID-19 and tremendous inequality, the DQ 
looks like a relatively simple matter in comparison.   
 
There is not enough data   
 
Other excuses for inaction are that there is not enough data on how increasing the DQ 
would impact foundations and specifically that some foundations may have restrictions 
on the use of their funds such as a perpetual endowment as we will discuss later.  Some 
argue that we also don’t know how much an increase in the DQ will result in additional 
funds.        
 
Our law firm is very interested in data on the charity sector. We have created our 
CharityData.ca website to assist the Canadian public with understanding the important 
role of charities.    
 
We agree that there is not enough data being collected by CRA. We have suggested on 
numerous occasions that CRA ask more questions on their T3010 to be able to allow the 
public greater information and nuance in understanding the charity sector.  Canada is far 
behind other countries in this regard.  That being said, unfortunately, there is no indication 
that CRA will be increasing the usefulness of the T3010. 
 
Having a lack of data did not stop some foundations from advocating that the 4.5% DQ 
should be reduced to 3.5% in 2004.   Lack of data has not stopped some who oppose an 
increase in the disbursement quota from implying that perpetual funds are quite common 
amongst foundations and that any increase in the DQ is unmanageable.   
 
In fact, we have data on all registered charities in terms of their assets, liabilities, revenue 
and expenditures.   With the current data, we can see which foundations are giving out 
10% or 15% and which are giving out less than 1%.  So, we have the data to understand 
that an increase of the DQ from 3.5% to say 7% or 10% is going to result in many 
foundations having to increase tremendously their grantmaking.   
 
There is no doubt that charitable assets are subject to a variety of restrictions, but how 
many foundations it affects exactly, what percentage of their funds are restricted, and 
how they are restricted is certainly not information that we have seen. Having this 
information would help understand the constraints on foundations.   In Schedule A we 

---PAGE BREAK---
6 
 
discuss the type of data that could be useful in understanding the issue.  We have 
requested that CRA obtain that data to improve our understanding of the DQ discussion, 
but we are not aware that they have done so.    
 
However, the lack of data in this area should not preclude action to change the DQ.   
Foundations have operated in some cases for decades without adequate data and one 
tries to make the best decisions despite an environment where there is not enough data. 
 
Therefore, the data issue is a bit of a red herring when it comes to the DQ issue.    
 
Some foundations will have a problem disbursing at a higher DQ level 
 
Some argue that a number of foundations may have trouble meeting a newly expanded 
DQ.  This may be true for some foundations.  In fact, some foundations with huge assets 
seem to have a ‘difficulty’ disbursing at the current 3.5% level and prefer giving at 1-2%.  
Unfortunately, as CRA does not prioritize enforcement of the DQ, and the number of CRA 
audits has plummeted over the last few years, it does not look like the DQ is treated by 
some foundations as much more than a suggestion from the Federal government.   
    
While some completely ignore the DQ, some registered charities have asked for CRA to 
grant them a disbursement quota reduction which would allow them to spend less than 
the DQ if there is a good reason to do so.   
 
Furthermore, if a change in the law requires a charity to do things differently, such as 
encroach on capital, a charity, for example in Ontario, can go to the Office of the Public 
Guardian and Trustee (OPGT) and file a Section 13 application under the Charities 
Accounting Act or more formally obtain a court order to change the legal restrictions 
covering a gift.  In other provinces they can go to court with an application for cy-près.  
 
While it may cost $10,000 – $20,000 for a charity to obtain a court order through this 
process, the more groups doing them the more efficient law firms will be in bringing them.   
For a $100 million foundation, that already spends significant amounts of money on 
administration, legal fees, accounting fees, branding etc., submitting one cy-près 
application is a very small ask.  
 

---PAGE BREAK---
7 
 
The cy-près system is an area of provincial jurisdiction and one that needs significant 
regulatory improvements.  Here are some examples of how a court may deal with a cy-
près application relating to spending rates: 
• If a group has a perpetual endowment for gifts to any registered charity of $10 
million and they wish to distribute all the funds to charities this year because they 
think that would be more convenient or expedient, a judge would probably not be 
prepared to allow such a change. 
• In some cases, courts may be prepared to make minor changes to the rates – for 
example to move from a restricted gift that is a traditional endowment where only 
income can be spent to a “total return” approach where income plus capital gains 
can be spent. 
• Furthermore, and most importantly to our discussion, if a change in the law makes 
it impossible for a registered charity to comply with the requirements of a restricted 
gift (such as an increase in the DQ and failure to meet the DQ could result in 
revocation and other consequences) the courts would probably be prepared to 
adjust the restrictions, but only enough to comply with the law.  If the DQ was 
increased to 7% and the charity only makes 6% income on the restricted gift, the 
court may allow the charity to encroach to the extent of 1%.  The courts would not 
allow a greater expenditure than is required by law.    So, the higher the DQ in that 
case, the more the directors of the charity, have an incentive to get a cy-près order 
and such cy-près order will have a greater impact on the rate of spending. 
 
Keep in mind, this sort of expenditure and effort for a process to vary the restrictions 
would only be needed if there are restricted gifts such as perpetual endowments, no other 
funds available to satisfy the DQ, and the returns in the market are not adequate to make 
the higher payout.  Based on this,  we believe that this will actually apply to a very small 
percentage of foundations. 
 
Certainly, since 2010 there is little reason for a donor to create a perpetual foundation 
even if they would like the fund to be long-term. Before 2010, unless a gift to a charity 
was structured as a 10-year gift (with income only being able to be spent in the first 10+ 
years) charities would need to spend both 80% of the receipted amount plus 3.5%.  With 
the 2010 changes removing the 80 percent requirement, foundations did not need to use 
the ten-year (or longer) concept and they can make an unrestricted gift and the board 
could just give out 3.5% per year.        
 
Therefore, some foundations would be in a better position to carry out their work if the 
DQ was increased to a higher number rather than being constrained by a donor who may 
have made certain assumptions decades ago that are not correct anymore. Keep in mind 

---PAGE BREAK---
8 
 
that likely this will affect a small number of groups that have perpetual endowments as 
their only asset.       
 
While some may balk at the opportunity to change the restrictions on foundations, others 
will welcome the ability to go to court to give the foundation more flexibility to spend more 
than what was set out sometimes decades ago by a donor at a very different time.     
 
 
An increase in the DQ could shorten the life of our Foundation  
 
This is potentially correct.  In theory, if you grant more funds per year then the foundation 
will use up its resources quicker and this may affect the longevity of the foundation. At its 
extreme, a foundation has the most likelihood of lasting forever if it never spends any 
money on charitable activities or grants.  Clearly, that is unacceptable, and we are not 
aware of people advocating that position. The goal of providing tax subsidies to 
foundations is to have them support charities and carry out in some cases charitable 
activities, not to remain forever.  Even with a higher disbursement quota, if foundations 
obtain good investment returns, and perhaps even have additional contributions from 
donors, the foundation can in theory last forever. So, the question is only one of degree.   
If the returns were not so consistently high, the actual grants by some very low and the 
need in society very significant, we would probably not be having this discussion.     
 
While in theory a forever foundation sounds great, there are many issues with such an 
approach.  Most forever foundations don’t last forever and end for many reasons including 
but not limited to, the board is no longer interested in running the foundation, fights within 
the organization, and investments are lost because of stock market crashes and 
embezzlement.  There are many other reasons for foundations being wound down, such 
as successor directors that are not aware of the legal restrictions on the funds they have 
and granting the funds to charities but not in accordance with their legal requirements. 
Furthermore, many foundations that originally were set up with the intention of lasting 
forever have either new directors, or their directors have changed their minds, and are 
now focused on a orderly, impactful, and legally compliant winddown of the foundation.       
 
The cost of forever foundations might be too great for our society in relation to the benefits 
provided and the tax subsidy.  The administrative costs including investment fees, etc. 
are significant.      
 

---PAGE BREAK---
9 
 
The excuses mentioned above are not compelling reasons to allow $95 billion to sit idle 
while there is so much need in Canada and around the world. 
 
Increasing DQ will not necessarily help groups that are the most vulnerable 
 
On page 3 of the ACCS submission the ACCS states: 
The ACCS agrees with the goal of supporting organizations who are 
providing service to the most vulnerable. However, the DQ is but one tool 
in the policy toolbox. We do not believe that there is clear evidence that 
raising the disbursement quota alone, without making other legislative 
changes and using other policy tools, will achieve that goal. 
 
At the moment, BIPOC groups and others serving historically disadvantaged communities 
have received almost no funding from foundations.  See Canadian charities giving to 
Indigenous Charities and Qualified Donees – 2018 and UNFUNDED: Black Communities 
overlooked by Canadian Philanthropy.      
 
If the DQ is increased from 3.5% to 7% or 10%, it will inevitably result in billions of dollars 
of extra grants or foundation spending on their charitable programs.  Indeed, increasing 
the DQ will not necessarily ensure that more funds go to particular organizations such as 
BIPOC groups.  Instead, consistent with the current problematic granting patterns, certain 
groups such as universities, hospitals, and religious institutions will probably continue to 
receive a disproportionate amount of the extra funds, as they currently receive a 
disproportionate amount of the grants. 
 
BIPOC groups currently receive a trivial amount of funds from charities, including but not 
limited to foundations.  If the DQ is doubled, and there are no other legislative changes 
or foundations have a change of heart, BIPOC groups may expect to receive double the 
amount of funds from groups currently spending 3.5%.  Receiving twice a trivial amount 
is better than receiving only the trivial amount.    
 
The key point might be that some foundations have particular priorities that don’t include 
funding BIPOC groups or certain others in need.  They may be focused on the opera, 
medical research, protecting animals, etc. However, because foundations will in general 
be providing much more funds to charities and if they continue to prefer to fund charities 
such as universities, hospitals and religious causes, it will allow some charities and 

---PAGE BREAK---
10 
 
governments to then reallocate some of the funds they would have given to these certain 
groups to BIPOC groups etc.    
 
The ACCS makes it clear that they do not support the Federal government “regulating the 
destination or direction of grants to specific communities and causes.”  Any proposal to 
require that a certain percentage of funds go to certain priority areas would probably be 
more complicated and divisive than an increase in the DQ.  This is another reason the 
DQ should have been increased years ago and we could have avoided some of the 
recriminations and discussions taking place today. 
 
Now we will discuss why we think the DQ should be increased. 
 
Here are some of our top reasons for significantly increasing the DQ: 
 
Why should governments increase support to charities when foundations don’t 
do their part? 
 
A number of organizations have called for the Federal and Provincial governments to 
more generously fund the charitable sector, especially in light of COVID-19.   It appears 
that governments have acted and continue to strongly support charities, especially at the 
provincial level.    If some representing the sector don’t believe there is any compelling 
reason to ensure more funds move from foundation investments to operating charities, 
then it completely undercuts the notion that the Federal and Provincial governments 
should provide additional funding to the charity sector during and after COVID-19.    Why 
should the Federal government incur greater debt and sacrifice funding for other 
programs when $95 billion-plus is sitting largely idle in private foundation investments and 
could be used to increase funding of operating charities?  If charities with large amounts 
of assets are not prepared to do more to fund operating charities, why should the Federal 
and Provincial governments do it?  
 
On a related note there is no cost to the Federal and Provincial governments for 
implementing this increase in the DQ.  In times of tremendous government debt and deficit 
there are many good proposals for the Federal and Provincial governments to spend 
money on different programs to improve society that in some cases these governments 
may not have the resources to fund.  This is a very helpful change does not cost 
governments or the tax system anything.   
  

---PAGE BREAK---
11 
 
The great need in society and many foundations use the DQ as a guide for how 
much to give 
 
As we have noted in our past articles, many of the largest foundations are giving 
significantly more than the 3.5% but a few are not.  
 
What should the norm be for foundations spending on grants and charitable activities, at 
the most minimal level?  Many operating charities are spending 60-80% per year.   Many 
Canadian DAFs say they are pushing out 15-20% per year. US private foundations are 
at a minimum 5% and people in the US are pushing for a higher disbursement obligation 
for US foundations.  Yet some very well-resourced charities in Canada are spending 3.5% 
or less.    
 
While the ACCS submission suggested that some foundations may misunderstand the 
DQ and see it as a cap rather than a floor – although this is possible, we believe the 
answer is a little more conventional.   Some foundations give generously and are focused 
on how much impact they can have on society; others see the charitable foundation as 
being part of the tax system.   If the Income Tax Act says an individual needs to pay a 
50% tax, very few people will voluntarily decide to pay more. Some foundations use 
similar logic.  Why if the Income Tax Act requires a 3.5% disbursement and allows the 
foundation to keep 96.5% of the amount with increases in investments being non-taxable, 
why should they disburse more?  Many foundations that are giving at 3.5% will simply 
adjust to give at 7% or 10% if it is required by a disbursement quota increase.  It is unlikely 
that those foundations will give any more than whatever the DQ requirement is set at.      
 
If the goal of philanthropy and charity is to improve society and the wellbeing of 
humankind by preventing and solving social issues and eliminating suffering, it will be 
beneficial to have a higher DQ.   
 
Investment returns much higher than 3.5% 
 
Since 2008, foundations have been receiving investment returns that are far in excess of 
the 3.5%. 
 
According to one Canadian source, “The long-term annual rate of return on the S&P/TSX 
Composite Index (TSX) was 9.3% per year between 1960 and 2020.”   While past returns 

---PAGE BREAK---
12 
 
do not guarantee the same for the future, the 3.5% DQ is clearly far below what returns 
many charities have received and this is one reason that there has been a huge 
accumulation of assets in some charities, including but not limited to private foundations.    
 
Significant tax subsidy  
 
The issue of the appropriate DQ rate should be is also related to the issue of the tax 
subsidy provided for donations, especially of marketable securities. The question is 
asked, “why should a donor get all the tax benefit upfront, and beneficiaries have to wait 
decades or longer to potentially receive the bulk of the benefits?”   
 
When a donor gives a foundation marketable securities, as is sometimes done with the 
largest transactions, there can be a 70%+ tax subsidy given to the donor when they 
receive an official donation receipt.   
 
In addition, and sometimes more importantly, as the asset grows within the foundation it 
does so on a tax-free basis.  Increases in the asset are not taxed.    
 
When you have both the income tax deduction to the donor and the income/capital gains 
in the foundation are not taxed, with the $95 billion in assets that private foundations have 
the costs to the tax system will be significant.  In total, the charity sector has assets of 
over $500 billion.   These two subsidies add up to many billions of dollars per year.   This 
should not be glossed over and it is an important factor when thinking about the 
appropriate DQ. 
 
Certainly, if the DQ stays at 3.5%, the Department of Finance will have to look even closer 
at the tax subsidies for donations to foundations and whether foundations may have to 
pay some income tax.   It would appear to be simpler to increase the DQ rather than 
impose an income tax on foundations. 
 
Cost of running perpetual funds 
 
While some idolize perpetual endowments there are many concerns with them.  From a 
public policy point of view, while one may not prohibit their operations or establishment, 
the tax system should not overly encourage them. It is rarely  discussed but if you have 

---PAGE BREAK---
13 
 
funds invested in perpetuity the investment fees on investing those funds are significant.  
Also, the internal and external (advisor) administrative costs of dealing with those funds 
can be significant.  Over decades the amounts can really add up such that a foundation 
may spend almost as much on these costs as they do on charitable activities and 
charitable grants. Furthermore, often a perpetual foundation will be set up with limited 
purposes that may become more irrelevant as time goes on.   
     
Dangers of having a large amount of capital sitting idle and controlled by a few 
people 
 
There is a lot of wealth inequality in Canada that needs to be addressed.  It is not just 
personal and corporate wealth, but also control over foundations who then can have 
significant influence over public policy and the charitable sector.  There are concerns that 
foundations sometimes lack diversity in their decision-making. Also, a disproportionate 
amount of the assets held by foundations are in Ontario.    
 
At the moment, a foundation can be controlled by one family or even one person.    This 
is not necessarily problematic but, in some cases, and when discussing large amounts of 
taxpayer subsidized funds, there may be concerns.   Unlike a CEO who can be fired or a 
politician who can be voted out, with many foundations there is no accountability to the 
public. Increasing the DQ will force slightly greater wealth distribution by requiring 
foundations to provide more funds to charities. The greater the funds charities receive, 
the more charitiable activities they can carry out.      
 
Protect the reputation of the charitable sector 
 
As we have seen, especially in the US, many critics of foundations are highlighting the 
inadequate grantmaking compared to assets.   The negative coverage can undermine the 
public’s confidence in foundations and the whole charitable sector. 
Public confidence in charities has already declined significantly and having so many 
assets being hoarded, with the tremendous need in our society, it will further undermine 
the public’s view of charities.        
Examples of the critical Canadian coverage are: 
As the disbursement quota consultation begins, the hoarding of money goes under the 
microscope 

---PAGE BREAK---
14 
 
Charities’ cash — and the special tax breaks it enjoys — warrants the new scrutiny 
proposed in federal budget 
The giving capacity of private foundations needs to be put on a war footing 
DQ Consultation: Fear and loathing in the charity sector 
Top 20 private foundations accumulate $40 billion in wealth, spend pennies on the dollar  
 
With COVID-19 and the increasingly difficult situation that governments at all levels are 
going to be dealing with over the next few years, the notion that $95 billion can be invested 
and only 3.5% used each year for grants or charitable programs is going to seem very 
unfair and cause a lot of criticisms of foundations. 
Some argue that foundations should be able to choose how much they give out and 
reserve their wealth for future needs. We take the position that this is inappropriate 
because foundations do not know what the future will bring in terms of donations and 
need. You could say that there is not enough data on that question!  It would be unlikely 
that there would not be donors in the future, but if there was a decline in donations in the 
future it might be the result of cynasism  about philanthropy in part because of the massive 
accumulations of assets by some private foundations.  If people start to despise 
foundations and philanthropists, it could cause a reduction in people contributing to 
charity now and in the future.  Despite all the discussion about the importance of having 
long-term funds to deal with difficult times, rainy days or to deal with long-term issues, 
with COVID-19 there is a torrential downpour of need. Some foundations are failing 
miserably in dealing with that situation. Keeping the DQ low may undermine the long-term 
prospects of philanthropy.         
 
Equity amongst philanthropists 
 
When a philanthropist gives an unrestricted gift to an operating charity, they get certain 
tax benefits.  Those funds are probably spent to help those in need within a year or two.   
When another philanthropist contributes to their own private foundation but decides they 
are only going to make grants or spend money on charitable programs at the minimum 
level of 3.5% then very little of those funds are spent over the next year or two actually 
helping people. The problem with this is that in both scenarios the philanthropists obtain 
the exact same tax benefit, but society is receiving very small benefits each year from the 
latter philanthropist.  Clearly, treating these two types of philanthropists the same is unfair. 
By having a higher DQ rate this will reduce the inequity slightly.  
 

---PAGE BREAK---
15 
 
Perhaps donations that don’t receive recognition and are unrestricted, which are much 
more helpful for operating charities, should receive greater tax incentives than restricted 
donations with or without recognition.   
 
Finance Consultation 
Below is our responses to the  Department of Finance’s specific questions asked as 
part of the consultation process: 
 
• 
Should the disbursement quota be raised to produce additional funding for 
charities, and to what extent? 
• 
Yes, and we have suggested the level of 10% per year. Perhaps the DQ 
could be graduated so assets under say $500,000 would be 5% and then 
assets over $500,000 would be 10%.   Another idea would be to have the 
DQ raised for 3 years to cover the huge investment increases and demands 
of COVID-19 and then have it lowered to say 7%.   
 
• 
Would it be desirable to increase the disbursement quota to a level that caused 
foundations to gradually encroach on investment capital, and would it be 
sustainable in the long-term for the sector? 
• 
Increasing the DQ to even 10% will not necessarily result in any 
encroachment on ‘capital’.  Many factors would be relevant including other 
unrestricted funds, further contributions, investment returns, ongoing 
operating costs, etc.   The long-term sustainability of the charitable sector 
will be enhanced if the DQ is increased significantly and even if that results 
in some foundations having to encroach on ‘capital’.  Some foundations that 
are stuck with donor restrictions might not be that upset if they are forced to 
give more as we have discussed above in dealing with cy-près. 
 
• 
What additional tools (e.g., monetary penalties or other intermediate sanctions) 
should be available to the CRA to enforce the disbursement quota rules?  
• 
While monetary penalties or intermediate sanctions may be appropriate, we 
would suggest the usual CRA approach of ‘education first’ would be 
applicable.  Also, we would suggest that there be greater transparency as 
to which foundations have been granted a disbursement quota reduction.  
• 
We also note that many foundations omit to complete or inaccurately 
complete Line 5900 and 5910 on the T3010 which is important for 
calculating the DQ.   Although we don’t think it is necessary and charities 

---PAGE BREAK---
16 
 
can complete accurately the aforementioned lines the DQ could be 
simplified.  At the moment it is based on an average value of a registered 
charity's property not used directly in charitable activities or administration 
during the 24 months before the beginning of the fiscal year if over $100,000 
for chartiable organizations or $25,000 for public and private foundation.   
We would suggest the DQ could be based on the total net assets instead of 
the current calculation scheme.   So therefore a charity would just need to 
use lines 4200 on the T3010 (total assets) and line 4350 (total liabilities).  
Instead of having the DQ averaged over 2 years probably it would  be 
simpler just to use the net assets from the last fiscal year’s T3010 to 
determine the amount that is required to be spent for the DQ in the following 
year.    
 
• 
We are concerned that some private or public foundations may be using 
grants to donor advised funds (DAFs) or other foundations to circumvent 
the intention of the DQ.  Consideration should be given to excluding 
amounts provided by foundations to public and private foundations in 
certain circumstances.  For example, if a foundation provides funds to a 
DAF and those funds are not granted out by the DAF within the same year, 
they should not count towards the DQ.  [This is a simple trick whereby the 
foundation meets their DQ requirement by providing funds to the DAF, the 
foundation can still recommend how those funds are used and no actual 
operating charity is receiving the funds.]  Furthermore, if a foundation grants 
funds to another entity with a stipulation that those funds, or part thereof, 
cannot be spent for a period greater than one year then those funds should 
not be counted toward the DQ.  [Another trick is to provide multiple years of 
funding in one year, but those funds are restricted so they can only be used 
over many years. Therefore, the granting foundation satisfies their DQ in a 
particular year without the full amount of the funds being available to be 
spent by the operating charity. If the foundation provided 5 grants over 5 
years, then it would have a different DQ treatment but practically the funds 
available for the charity to spend and the timing is the same.] 
 
• 
Do the relieving and accumulation of property provisions continue to be useful for 
charities? 
• 
Yes, there may be instances where they are required.  There should be 
greater transparency as to why CRA provides to a particular group an ability 
to spend less than the DQ provides. If there will not be greater transparency, 
then perhaps these rules should be abolished.    
   

---PAGE BREAK---
17 
 
• 
Do the existing carry-forward provisions strike the appropriate balance between 
ensuring the timely disbursement of funds and allowing foundations to make large 
gifts on a more infrequent basis?   
• 
They seem to be appropriate if the DQ is increased to 10%.  Otherwise, it 
may be better to eliminate a carry-forward.  The carry-forward provides 
flexibility but at the moment some foundations seem to have too much 
flexibility and they are not doing enough to have a public benefit in light of 
the significant tax advantages.   
 
• 
Are there any temporary changes to the disbursement quota that should be 
considered in the context of the Covid-19 recovery? 
• 
Our preference would be to increase the DQ substantially to 10%.  If this is 
not possible then perhaps the DQ is increased to an amount significantly 
higher than 3.5% but lower than 10%, but over the next 3 years as the 
society is dealing with and recovering from COVID-19 the DQ could be 
temporarily at 10%. 
 
The DQ discussion is not the only issue affecting the charity sector and there are other 
issues at hand that relate directly or indirectly to the DQ discussion.   
 
1) The current donation tax credit, specifically gifts of marketable securities, largely 
result in a few very wealthy individuals and corporations receiving most of the tax 
benefit.   While we support benefits for donations to charities it is based on the 
notion that the funds will be used for charitable activities at some reasonable point 
in time.  At the moment, a person who donates to a hospital or university or 
Indigenous charity receives the same benefit whether it is unrestricted or restricted 
as to time or area.   Obviously for charities having unrestricted funds is more useful 
– sometimes far more useful.  If a donor expects that they can donate funds to a 
private foundation, they can receive 100% of the tax benefits in the year of donation 
and they can spend only 3.5% of the funds while receiving perhaps a 10% 
investment return then the deal between the donor and the taxpayer is wildly out 
of sync and should be adjusted.  For example, one idea could be that, if funds are 
donated with a requirement that they are kept for more than 1 year they should 
receive a reduced tax benefit and if it is more than 10 years, they would receive a 
further reduced tax benefit and if it is more than 20 years there would not be a tax 
benefit. 
    
2) Additionally, there is a huge tax cost of having $95 billion invested in a manner 
where there is no income tax on the investments. 

---PAGE BREAK---
18 
 
  
3) If you combine the donation tax credit and the non-taxability of registered charity 
investments this gives a huge tax subsidy largely to a small group of people and 
increases the divide in our society and can hurt the reputation of charities as they 
may be increasingly viewed as wealthy and undeserving of support.  
  
4) DAFs have increased tremendously over the last decade.  Currently, the DQ 
applies to registered charities, but not to individual funds and so theoretically a 
DAF can satisfy its DQ requirement and therefore allow some funds to avoid any 
payout.  There have been proposals that not only should the DAF meet the regular 
DQ requirement but also each DAF account should also meet a certain minimum 
disbursement requirement.   In the US there have been proposals that each DAF 
fund should distribute 20% per year and these seem to have bipartisan support.  
Most contributors to DAFs, but not all, would probably be fine with a 5-year time 
horizon for expenditures. Many DAFs are in total distributing around 10-20% per 
year so in terms of the DQ increase it would probably have a very limited impact.  
Many DAFs require minimum disbursement of 3-5% per fund and in addition, other 
donors donate to the DAFs flow their funds-through the same year to other 
charities and this results in the 10-20% per year expenditures.  It is correct that 
some DAFs may allow some of their individual funds not to disburse, but that is a 
far less significant problem than the $95 billion sitting in private foundations.  
Although some have tried to differentiate between community foundation DAFs 
and DAFs affiliated with financial institutions, there are far more similarities than 
differences and some DAFs affiliated with financial institutions may be disbursing 
more funds than community foundations.             
 
5) We talk about charities having a public benefit and helping those most vulnerable 
in society.  How do we know with the very limited transparency that we have in 
Canada, that this is actually taking place?  Everyone knows a few charities doing 
great work but many of the largest charities in this country are largely opaque and 
there is little disclosure about them.  Some large foundations don’t even have a 
website or social media presence.  The greater the tax benefits and the greater the 
assets the greater the importance of having transparency, accountability and 
compliance with legal requirements.     
 
Conclusion 
The DQ is only one of the legal requirements that charities must meet.  There are many 
issues within the charitable sector that will not be solved by increasing the DQ, such as 
greater transparency and other issues we have raised in our submissions. We argue that 
if the Department of Finance does not increase the DQ there will be negative implications 
to the charity sector.  With COVID-19 and the Federal government being prepared to 

---PAGE BREAK---
19 
 
make so many changes, continued reluctance to increase the DQ will result in greater 
cynicism about government and their decision-making processes.       
 
Moreover, while increasing the DQ may result in more funds going to operating charities 
there is also a need to ensure that more of the funds go to certain historically 
disadvantaged groups. Increasing the DQ is one part of moving the sector forward in a 
positive way, but the funds granted also need to be provided more equitably.  We have 
discussed the very unfortunate granting practices that have resulted in very little funds 
going to BIPOC charities.  We are not optimistic that foundations will necessarily grant 
more equitably but having them grant more funds will free up other groups to tackle that 
challenge.            
 
Increasing the DQ is a minor adjustment to the Income Tax Act and far more needs to be 
done in the charity sector to have it work better and achieve more. 
 
If you require further information or wish to discuss this submission, please do not hesitate 
to contact us.  
 
Submitted by: 
 
Mark Blumberg, Partner, and Jessie Lang, Associate Lawyer 
Blumberg Segal LLP 
 
Tel: 416-361-1982  
Reply email charity@blumbergs.ca 
 
http://www.CanadianCharityLaw.ca 
http://www.SmartGiving.ca 
http://www.CharityData.ca    
 
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
20 
 
Schedule A 
 
Here are some questions that we believe chould be added to the T3010. These 
changes could be applicable to foundations that have large assets. Alternatively CRA 
could have in the past canvassed the largest 500 hundred foundations to find out this 
information.  While having this information might be helpful in the discussion of the DQ, 
we maintain that it is certainly not necessary to have this level of detail for Finance to 
decide to increase the DQ.      
 
1) Externally restricted vs. unrestricted: how much of a foundation’s assets are 
restricted as compared to the foundation’s unrestricted assets (which would 
include board restricted or internally restricted) – and the amounts of each. 
 
2) Nature of External Restrictions: If it is an externally restricted gift then the 
nature of the restriction(s) for each fund (keeping in mind that there can be more 
than one restriction per fund). For example: 
 
a. Perpetually endowed funds where only the income can be disbursed 
b. Perpetually endowed funds where a total return approach to disbursement 
is permissible 
c. Restrictions as to the timing of when funds can be spent (e.g. funds must 
be disbursed over 5 years, or only the income can be spent for the first 10 
years, then can encroach on capital) 
d. Restrictions as to the purpose of funds (e.g. can only be spent in a 
particular charitable scope  
e. Restrictions as to the location of funds (i.e. can only be spent in a 
particular geographic area) 
f. Restrictions as to how funds can be spent on a particular purpose (e.g. 
can only be spent on a particular charitable activity that furthers a broader 
charitable purpose) 
 
3) Explanation of each fund: the current value of the fund and list of restrictions 
that apply 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
21 
 
4) Origin of Restrictions: When were the restrictions imposed and by whom 
(donor or Board or other person/entity) 
 
5) Flexibility of Restricted Assets: What flexibilities if any are provided in terms of 
the restriction (some may have amendment clauses, cy-près options, secondary 
purposes, ability to loan against capital, ability in exceptional cases to encroach 
on capital, etc.) 
 
 

---PAGE BREAK---
