 
 
 
Written Submission for the Pre-Budget 
Consultations in Advance of the 
Upcoming Federal Budget on 
Transparency and Accountability in 
the Non-Profit and Charity Sector 
 
 
 
 
Submission to the  
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance  
 
July 28, 2025  
 

---PAGE BREAK---
2 
 
 
List of Recommendations 
Primary Recommendations 
• 
Recommendation 1: That the Federal government amend Section 241 of the Income Tax Act in order to allow 
the CRA to disclose serious non-compliance with legal requirements by registered charities and other qualified 
donees. 
• 
Recommendation 2: That the Federal government amend Section 241 of the Income Tax Act in order to allow 
the CRA to disclose to the public, information contained on the T1044 Non-Profit Organization (NPO) 
Information Return. 
Secondary Recommendations 
• 
Recommendation 3: That the Federal government provide funding to CRA to improve the transparency of 
the T3010 Registered Charity Information Return. 
• 
Recommendation 4: That the Federal government further increase the disbursement quota payout from the 
slight increase from 3.5% to 5% beginning in 2023 to a higher number, such as 8-10% per year, to deal with 
the $160 billion of accumulations held by private and public foundations.  
• 
Recommendation 5: That the Federal government ensure that each donor-advised fund is required to disburse 
a certain percentage per year per fund.   
• 
Recommendation 6: That the Federal government through the Charities Directorate of CRA roll out additional 
educational programs to assist Canadian charities and non-profits understand their compliance obligations or 
fund educational initiatives within the sector to increase compliance.   
• 
Recommendation 7: That the Federal government require charities to demonstrate annually in their reporting 
that they actually have a “public benefit”, rather than this being assumed. 
• 
Recommendation 8: That the Federal government consider a system where the ability to issue tax receipts is 
not based on being a “registered charity” but rather a narrower category of deductible gift recipients, as is 
currently in Australia. 
• 
Recommendation 9: That the Federal government establish a unit within the RCMP, or other police force, 
tasked with the responsibility of reviewing large, serious and complicated schemes that abuse registered 
charities and provide inappropriate official donation receipts or inappropriate private benefits. 
• 
Recommendation 10: As the Federal Government is an important funder, either directly or indirectly, of the 
charity sector in Canada, the Federal government should maintain and increase funding to this important sector 
while improving the funding application process, and increasing the percentage of funds provided as 
unrestricted funds.     

---PAGE BREAK---
3 
 
 
 
 
July 28, 2025 
 
 
Dear Members of the Standing Committee on Finance,  
 
 
Blumbergs Professional Corporation is a law firm based in Toronto that provides legal services to Canadian non-
profits, registered charities and donors. Blumbergs maintains the websites, CanadianCharityLaw.ca and 
www.Smartgiving.ca that provide extensive information and resources to Canadian charities to encourage them 
to understand their legal obligations and strive for higher ethical standards and to donors to understand how to 
vet charities.  Blumbergs also maintains the website www.CharityData.ca which is the largest portal of 
information on the Canadian charity sector with up to twenty-one years of information on every Canadian 
registered charity. We encourage donors to be generous but careful in the way they practice charity and 
philanthropy.    
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
We are concerned that adequate measures are not in place to ensure the efficient use of charitable assets, prevent 
the misappropriation of charitable assets, and prevent non-profits and charities from engaging in egregious 
conduct. We will provide some recommendations to improve transparency in the non-profit and charitable sector 
and other recommendations to improve regulation and impact of the charity sector.   
 
  
Introduction 
 
The voluntary sector in Canada plays a vital role in this country.  The charity sector has revenue of over $393 
billion.  Unfortunately, over the last decade, public trust in the charity sector has plummeted. Those involved with 
volunteering or working in the charity sector deserve more detailed and better information on their charities and 
the sector.  Improvements in the voluntary sector by the Federal government will help not only non-profits and 
charities but also the many groups that they serve, such as the unemployed, Indigenous peoples, patients, those 
with a disability, seniors, and students.  The services provided by non-profits and charities affect people in all 
parts of the country, including major urban, small towns and rural and remote communities.     
 
 
Transparency 
 
The work that charities do is extremely important to our society, so it is vital that various stakeholders, such as 
the public, the media, the government, donors, employees, volunteers, etc., have access to key information on 
Blumbergs Professional Corporation – Barristers & Solicitors    

---PAGE BREAK---
4 
 
what charities are doing and how they are doing it.  Transparency will ultimately increase public trust and 
confidence in the sector by making the public more informed about the work that charities undertake.  
 
Transparency can shine a light on certain charities, which will also hopefully help to improve the governance of 
non-profits and charities and reduce the amount of abuse that goes on.  People are less likely to abuse charities if 
they know that they will be more easily discovered. Less abuse of charities’ assets will also result in greater 
productivity and public benefit.  
 
Registered Charities and Transparency 
 
Currently, the confidentiality provisions in Section 241 of the Income Tax Act (Canada) forbid the CRA from 
disclosing information about any non-profit or registered charity either through an informal request or a formal 
access-to-information request except if it falls within certain narrow exceptions, such as the public portion of the 
T3010, or if there has been consent for disclosure provided by the non-profit or registered charity.  
 
Without the consent of the charity, CRA can only provide information on the charity’s non-compliance after the 
charity’s registration has been revoked, which may be 10-20 years after CRA started having significant concerns 
about the charity.  CRA also does not have the power to disclose to the public any information surrounding 
charities that have had complaints of receipting fraud, abusive receipting schemes, systemic child abuse or other 
major concerns such as terrorism. CRA also cannot disclose this information to MPs and Senators.   This 
completely differs from the methods of the Charity Commission of England and Wales, which regularly 
distributes information to the public when it has concerns with particular registered charities. The Australian 
government has made a number of changes to ‘lift the veil of secrecy’ on Australian charities. In Canada, the 
public, especially donors, should have the right to know of any serious non-compliance by charities prior to 
revocation. It will take amendments to the Income Tax Act to allow for such disclosure.  We anticipate that there 
will be little or no fiscal cost for the adoption of the transparency recommendation above. 
 
Recommendation 1: That the Federal government amend Section 241 of the Income Tax Act in order to 
allow the CRA to disclose serious non-compliance with legal requirements by registered charities and other 
qualified donees. 
  
 
 
Non-Profit Organizations and Transparency 
 
It is estimated that there are between 80,000 -100,000 non-profits that are not registered charities or other types 
of qualified donees in Canada. While not as large as the registered charity sector, NPOs are still vitally important. 
These NPOs are exempt from almost all transparency requirements even though they are exempt from taxes, and 
in many cases, they receive government funding, support or public donations. While non-profits, that are not 
charities, must in some cases file the two-page Form T1044, Non-Profit Organization (NPO) Information Return, 
such form is not made available to the public either electronically or by request.  The T1044 is filed with the 
CRA, which then inputs all the information in its database.  There is no additional cost or “red tape” associated 
with this proposal as non-profits are already filing the form, and the CRA is already inputting the information.  
We are very pleased that the Department of Finance in their Fall Economic Statement indicated that the T1044 
would be updated and that a larger number of groups will need to complete this form.   However, the Department 
of Finance did not commit to making the form public.  The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is concerned 
about the monitoring of non-profits in Canada that are not registered charities and just improving the form without 
making it public will do little to improve transparency and accountability of non-profits.    

---PAGE BREAK---
5 
 
 
Recommendation 2:  That the Federal government amend Section 241 of the Income Tax Act in order to allow 
the CRA to disclose to the public, information contained on the T1044 Non-Profit Organization (NPO) 
Information Return. 
 
 
Other Recommendations: 
 
There are many ways in which the regulation of charities can be improved to result in greater public benefit that 
the Committee may wish to also consider: 
 
3) The CRA should improve the T3010 to ask more questions and provide greater transparency in the 
charity sector.  The T3010 lags behind many other countries and their requirements even though those 
countries do not have as generous tax benefits.  A better T3010 can lead to a better charity sector. 
While the CRA has made a number of improvements in T3010 Version 24, the T3010 still does not 
ask about volunteers, governance, related entities or material diversion of assets not reported to 
regulators.  Having a more robust T3010 will mean that funders may not have to ask so many questions 
of individual charities if all the information is in one place and it will make it easier for the public to 
find information on registered charities; 
 
4) Private and public foundations are currently holding about $160 billion in assets. The small recent 
change from the Liberal government to bring the DQ to 5% in 2023/2024 for registered charities with 
assets over $1 million resulted in an additional $1.6 billion in charitable activities and gifts from public 
and private foundations.  However, in light of the astronomical growth in assets of some foundations, 
this is not adequate, and it probably makes more sense to have a disbursement quota in the range of 8-
10% per year. This will result in billions of additional dollars for operating charities; 
 
5) With donor-advised funds, donors get an immediate tax receipt, while in some cases, none of the 
money will be distributed to charities for years.  Finance should ensure that each donor-advised fund 
account is required to disburse a certain percentage per year per fund.   It could be as low as 10% or it 
could be 15% to 20% per year, as has been suggested in the US in certain proposals.   
  
6) Canadian charities generally want to be legally compliant.  Those who are deliberately abusing the 
system are a very small minority. It would be helpful if CRA would conduct more educational 
programs to assist charities, especially small and rural charities, in understanding how to comply with 
the requirements of a registered charity or if the Charities Partnership Outreach Program of CRA could 
be reinstated, which provided funds to Canadian charities to carry out educational initiatives within 
the sector to increase charity compliance; 
 
7) Require charities to demonstrate annually in their reporting (as in the UK) that they actually have a 
“public benefit”, rather than this being assumed, which could help the sector by increasing public 
confidence and reducing the number of dormant charities; 
 
8) Consider whether Canada should move to a system similar to Australia’s, where the ability to issue 
tax receipts is not based on being a “registered charity” but rather a narrower category of deductible 
gift recipients;  
 

---PAGE BREAK---
6 
 
9) Establish a unit within the RCMP, or other police force, tasked with the responsibility of reviewing 
complicated abusive charity schemes that provide inappropriate official donation receipts and other 
inappropriate private benefits; and 
 
10) All levels of government in Canada provide funding of approximately $252 billion to the charity sector 
each year. This is approximately 64% of the total revenue of the charity sector.  This funding is vitally 
important and should be maintained or enhanced. For governments to fund the sector, they need to 
maintain their tax base and tax revenues. 
 
 
If you require further information or wish to discuss this submission, please do not hesitate to contact us. We 
would certainly be interested in presenting to the Committee if it would be helpful and the opportunity should 
arise. 
 
Submitted by: 
 
Mark Blumberg 
Blumbergs Professional Corporation   
Tel: 416-361-1982 
mark@blumbergs.ca 
http://www.CanadianCharityLaw.ca 
http://www.SmartGiving.ca 
http://www.CharityData.ca    

---PAGE BREAK---
